CE-655 - Moving DNS forwading tutorial to docs (#21348)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/services/discovery/dns-forwarding/enable.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: Enable DNS forwarding
description: ->
  Learn how to configure different DNS servers to perform DNS forwarding to Consul servers.
---

# Enable DNS forwarding

This page describes the process to enable DNS forwarding to Consul servers. 

You can apply these operations on every node where a Consul agent is running.

## Requirements

To enable DNS forwarding, your deployment must have the following:

- A running Consul server instance
- One or more Consul client nodes with registered services in the Consul catalog
- The `iptables` command available, or one of the following local DNS servers: 
    - [systemd-resolved](#systemd-resolved)
    - [BIND](#bind)
    - [Dnsmasq](#dnsmasq)
    - [Unbound](#unbound)
    - [macOS system resolver](#macos)

### Network address configuration

The example configurations on this page assumes Consul's DNS server is listening on the loopback interface on the same node of the local DNS server. 

If Consul is not listening on the loopback IP, replace the references to `localhost` and `120.0.0.1` in the configuration and commands with the appropriate IP address for your environment.

> 
> </Note>

Author: ```suggestion
```

---
layout: docs
page_title: Enable DNS forwarding
description: ->
  Learn how to configure different DNS server to perform DNS forwarding to Consul servers.
---

# Enable DNS forwarding

This topic describes the process to configure different DNS servers to enable DNS forwarding to Consul servers.

You can apply these operations on every node where a Consul agent is running.

## Requirements

To enable DNS forwarding, your deployment must have the following:

- A running Consul server instance
- One or more Consul client nodes with services registered in the Consul catalog
- The `iptables` command available or one of the following local DNS servers: 
    - [systemd-resolved](#systemd-resolved)
    - [BIND](#bind)
    - [Dnsmasq](#dnsmasq)
    - [Unbound](#unbound)

>     - [iptables](#iptables)

Author: ```suggestion
```

## configured search domains.
##
## Run "resolvectl status" to see details about the uplink DNS servers
## currently in use.
##
## Third party programs must not access this file directly, but only through the
## symlink at /etc/resolv.conf. To manage man:resolv.conf(5) in a different way,
## replace this symlink by a static file or a different symlink.
##
## See man:systemd-resolved.service(8) for details about the supported modes of
## operation for /etc/resolv.conf.

nameserver 127.0.0.53
options edns0
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

Ensure that the operating system can resolve DNS queries to the `.consul` domain.

```shell-session
$ host consul.service.consul
consul.service.consul has address 127.0.0.1
```

### Using any local resolver with systemd

By default, the local resolver stub in the `resolved.conf` file is configured to listen for UDP and TCP requests at `127.0.0.53:53`. However, you can set the `DNSStubListener` option to `false` to disable the stub. As a result, your system is able to use any DNS configuration as long as it loads earlier than `resolved`.

<CodeBlockConfig filename="/etc/systemd/resolved.conf">

```plaintext
DNSStubListener=false
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

> 
> Disabling the local resolver stub can also solve other DNS configuration issues. 

Author: ```suggestion
```

This configuration realizes full DNS forwarding, which means that all DNS queries for the host are forwarded to Consul, not just the ones for the `.consul` top level domain. Since Consul by default only resolves the `.consul` top level domain, you must set the [`recursors`](/consul/docs/agent/config/config-files#recursors) flag if you want your node to be able to resolve other domains when using `iptables` configuration.

<Note>

In case you use DNS relay hosts in your network, they should not be on the same host, otherwise the redirects intercept the traffic.

</Note>

### Configure Consul recursors

Add recursors to your Consul configuration.

<CodeBlockConfig filename="/etc/consul.d/consul.hcl">

```hcl
# DNS recursors
recursors = [ "1.1.1.1" ]
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

Recursors should not include the `localhost` address because the `iptables` redirects would intercept the requests.

You can replace the `1.1.1.1` address in the example with another DNS server address. This is suitable for situations where an external DNS

> service is already running in your infrastructure and is used as the recursor.

Author: Replacing the DNS server address

The operations performed in this page can be applied on every node where a Consul agent is running.

## Requirements

To enable DNS forwarding, your deployment must have the following:

- A running Consul server instance
- One or more Consul client nodes with services registered in the Consul catalog
- One of the following local DNS servers running, `iptables` command available, or macOS running: 
    - [systemd-resolved](#systemd-resolved)
    - [BIND](#bind)
    - [dnsmasq](#dnsmasq)
    - [Unbound](#unbound)
    - [iptables](#iptables)
    - [macOS](#macos)

<Note>

The configuration assumes Consul's DNS server is listening on the loopback interface on the same node of the local DNS server. 
If Consul is not listening on the loopback IP, replace the references to `localhost` and `120.0.0.1` in the configuration and commands with the appropriate IP address for your environment.

</Note>

## systemm-resolved

[`systemd-resolved`](https://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/systemd/resolved/) is a system service that provides network name resolution to local applications. Is the default local DNS server for many Linux distributions.

> You can configure the `systemd-resolved` service to send `.consul` domain queries to Consul by creating a `consul.conf` file located in the `/etc/systemd/resolved.conf.d/` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure the `systemd-resolved` service to send `.consul` domain queries to Consul by creating a `consul.conf` file located in the `/etc/systemd/resolved.conf.d/` directory.
```

removed "you can" for brevity

<Tabs>
<Tab heading="systemd 245 and older">

> Add the following settings to your resolved configuration file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a `[Resolve]` section to your resolved configuration.
```

For Aimee's reference [Introduce code block with an descriptive, imperative sentence that ends with a period](https://github.com/hashicorp/tutorials/blob/main/STYLE_GUIDE.md#code-blocks).

The two possible solutions for this limitation are:
 - [configure Consul DNS service to listen on port `53`](/consul/docs/agent/config/config-files#dns_port) instead of `8600`
 - map port `53` to `8600` using `iptables` 

Binding to port `53` usually requires running Consul as a privileged user or running Linux with the `CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE` capability. 
When using Consul Docker image, add the following to the environment to allow Consul to use the port: `CONSUL_ALLOW_PRIVILEGED_PORTS=yes`.

To avoid running Consul as a privileged user, the following `iptables` commands are sufficient to map port `53` to `8600`, redirecting DNS queries to Consul.

```shell-session
# iptables --table nat --append OUTPUT --destination localhost --protocol udp --match udp --dport 53 --jump REDIRECT --to-ports 8600 \
  iptables --table nat --append OUTPUT --destination localhost --protocol tcp --match tcp --dport 53 --jump REDIRECT --to-ports 8600
```

</Tab>
<Tab heading="systemd 246 and newer">

Systemd 246 and newer allow you to specify the DNS port directly in the `systemd-resolved` configuration file.
Previous versions of systemd required iptables rules to direct DNS traffic to Consul.

> Add the following settings to your resolved configuration file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a `[Resolve]` section to your resolved configuration.
```

<CodeBlockConfig filename="/etc/systemd/resolved.conf.d/consul.conf">

```ini
[Resolve]
DNS=127.0.0.1:8600
DNSSEC=false
Domains=~consul
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

</Tab>
</Tabs>

<Note>

PTR record queries will still be sent out to the other configured resolvers, in addition to Consul.

</Note>

After creating the resolved configuration, restart `systemd-resolved`.

```shell-session
# systemctl restart systemd-resolved
```

The command produces no output.

### Validate the systemd-resolved configuration

> 

Author: @aimeeu and @boruszak  the commands are not mandatory to complete the configuration but only to verify that the configuration is correctly performed. They are in logical order but, since none of them is changing anything in the configuration, they will work even if performed in a different order.

The order provided is only to move from the wider context to a more narrow scope.

First 3 are to check that the DNS configuration is in place:
* DNS server is up and running
* DNS server is configured to forward to Consul
* DNS server is able to resolve *.consul queries

If not, we need to go back to the DNS server config and check what is missing

Second 3 are to check if OS configuration is in place:
* OS /etc/resolv.conf file points to the correct stub generated by the DNS server
* OS /etc/resolv.conf content points to Consul DNS
* OS is able to resolve *.consul queries

If not we need to investigate OS configuration.

#rev-server=240.0.0.0/4,127.0.0.1#8600
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

Restart the `dnsmasq` service after creating the configuration.

You can configure additional settings in `dnsmasq` that may be useful in your environments. 
Refer to [`dnsmasq(8)`](http://www.thekelleys.org.uk/dnsmasq/docs/dnsmasq-man.html) for additional details.

<CodeBlockConfig filename="/etc/dnsmasq.conf">

```plaintext
# Accept DNS queries only from hosts whose address is on a local subnet.
#local-service

# Don't poll /etc/resolv.conf for changes.
#no-poll

# Don't read /etc/resolv.conf. Get upstream servers only from the command
# line or the dnsmasq configuration file (see the "server" directive below).
#no-resolv

# Specify IP address(es) of other DNS servers for queries not handled
# directly by consul. There is normally one 'server' entry set for every
# 'nameserver' parameter found in '/etc/resolv.conf'. See dnsmasq(8)'s
# 'server' configuration option for details.
#server=1.2.3.4
#server=208.67.222.222
#server=8.8.8.8

# Set the size of dnsmasq's cache. The default is 150 names. Setting the
# cache size to zero disables caching.
#cache-size=65536
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

## BIND

> [BIND](https://www.isc.org/bind/) is a suite of software for interacting with the Domain Name System (DNS). Its most prominent component, `named`, short for name daemon, performs both of the main DNS server roles, acting as an authoritative name server for DNS zones and as a recursive resolver in the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[BIND](https://www.isc.org/bind/) is a robust DNS system. Its most prominent component, `named`, performs both of the main DNS server roles, acting as an authoritative name server for DNS zones and as a recursive resolver in the network.
```

<Note>

If your distribution uses systemd, you may need to disable `systemd-resolved` prior to following this example. 
 
</Note>

> You can configure the BIND service to send `.consul` domain queries to Consul by:
> - creating a configuration file for `named` with `DNSSEC` disabled
> - creating a zone configuration file to manage the `.consul` domain 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure the BIND service to send `.consul` domain queries to Consul using the following steps:

1. Create a `named` configuration file with `DNSSEC` disabled.
1. Create a zone configuration file to manage the `.consul` domain. 
```

Applied [style guide](https://github.com/hashicorp/tutorials/blob/main/STYLE_GUIDE.md#lists)

Used the same verbiage as in the subsection headings

### Named configuration file

> Edit the `/etc/named.conf` to configure your BIND instance. Remember to disable `DNSSEC` so that Consul and BIND can communicate. Also add an `include` section to include the zone file you will create in the next step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edit the `/etc/named.conf` to configure your BIND instance. Remember to disable `DNSSEC` so that Consul and BIND can communicate. Add an `include` section to include the zone file that you create in the next step.
```

The following example shows a BIND configuration with `DNSSEC` disabled.

<CodeBlockConfig filename="/etc/named.conf">

```plaintext
options {
  listen-on port 53 { 127.0.0.1; };
  listen-on-v6 port 53 { ::1; };
  directory       "/var/named";
  dump-file       "/var/named/data/cache_dump.db";
  statistics-file "/var/named/data/named_stats.txt";
  memstatistics-file "/var/named/data/named_mem_stats.txt";
  allow-query     { localhost; };
  recursion yes;

  dnssec-enable no;
  dnssec-validation no;

  /* Path to ISC DLV key */
  bindkeys-file "/etc/named.iscdlv.key";

  managed-keys-directory "/var/named/dynamic";
};

include "/etc/named/consul.conf";
```

> </CodeBlockConfig>

Reviewer: Wondering if this section should actually be under the first bullet point and the "Zone..." subsection under the second bullet point since configuring BIND is a [multi-step procedure](https://hashicorp.atlassian.net/wiki/x/DICVpg).

> ### Zone file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Zone configuration file
```

Add "configuration" so the heading has parallel structure to "Named configuration file".

> Set up a zone for your Consul managed records in `consul.conf`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set up a zone for your Consul-managed records in `consul.conf`.
```

<CodeBlockConfig filename="/etc/named/consul.conf">

```dns-zone-file
zone "consul" IN {
  type forward;
  forward only;
  forwarders { 127.0.0.1 port 8600; };
};
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

## Unbound

> [Unbound](https://www.unbound.net/) is a validating, recursive, caching DNS resolver. It is designed to be fast and lean and incorporates modern features based on open standards.

Reviewer: This text is verbatim from the Unbound website. Suggest updating to something like

```suggestion
Use [Unbound](https://www.unbound.net/) when you need a fast and lean DNS resolver for Linux and macOS.
```

<Note>

 If your distribution uses systemd, you may need to disable `systemd-resolved` prior to following this example. 
 
</Note>

> Unbound is typically configured in a `unbound.conf` file or in a series of files in the `/etc/unbound/unbound.conf.d` directory. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure Unbound in an `unbound.conf` file or in a series of files in the `/etc/unbound/unbound.conf.d` directory. 
```

> In this example you will use a `consul.conf` file in the `/etc/unbound/unbound.conf.d` directory.

Reviewer: We could delete this sentence since the file name appears in the rendered code block.

> Add the following settings to your Unbound configuration file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add server and stub settings to your Unbound configuration file.
```

<CodeBlockConfig filename="/etc/unbound/unbound.conf.d/consul.conf">

```plaintext
#Allow insecure queries to local resolvers
server:
  do-not-query-localhost: no
  domain-insecure: "consul"

#Add consul as a stub-zone
stub-zone:
  name: "consul"
  stub-addr: 127.0.0.1@8600
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

You may have to add the following line to the bottom of your `/etc/unbound/unbound.conf` file for the new configuration to be included.

<CodeBlockConfig filename="/etc/unbound/unbound.conf">

```plaintext
include: "/etc/unbound/unbound.conf.d/*.conf"
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

## iptables

> [iptables](https://www.netfilter.org/projects/iptables/index.html) is a generic firewalling software, part of the netfilter project, that allows you to define traffic rules for your system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[iptables](https://www.netfilter.org/projects/iptables/index.html) is a generic firewalling software that allows you to define traffic rules for your system.
```
removed for brevity

> In situations where you don't have a local DNS server on the Consul agent node you can use `iptables` to forward DNS requests on port `53` to the Consul agent running on the same machine without using a secondary service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't have a local DNS server on the Consul agent node, use `iptables` to forward DNS requests on port `53` to the Consul agent running on the same machine without using a secondary service.
```

removed a few things for brevity

> This configuration realizes a full DNS forwarding, meaning that all DNS queries for the host will be forwarded to Consul and not only the ones for the `.consul` *Top Level Domain* (TLD). Since Consul by default only resolves the `.consul` TLD you ***must*** set the [`recursors`](/consul/docs/agent/config/config-files#recursors) flag if you want your node to be able to resolve other domains when using `iptables` configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration realizes full DNS forwarding, which means that all DNS queries for the host are forwarded to Consul, not just the ones for the `.consul` top level domain. Since Consul by default only resolves the `.consul` top level domain, you must set the [`recursors`](/consul/docs/agent/config/config-files#recursors) flag if you want your node to be able to resolve other domains when using `iptables` configuration.
```

a few edits for my clarity

<Note>

> In case you use DNS relay hosts in your network, they _should not_ be on the same host, otherwise the redirects will intercept the traffic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case you use DNS relay hosts in your network, they should not be on the same host, otherwise the redirects intercept the traffic.
```

</Note>

### Configure Consul recursors

> To configure recursors for Consul, add the following to your Consul configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add recursors to your Consul configuration.
```

<CodeBlockConfig filename="/etc/consul.d/consul.hcl">

```hcl
# DNS recursors
recursors = [ "1.1.1.1" ]
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

Recursors should not include the `localhost` address because the `iptables` redirects would intercept the requests.

You can replace the `1.1.1.1` address in the example with another DNS server address. This is suitable for situations where an external DNS
service is already running in your infrastructure and is used as the recursor.

### Create iptables rules

> Once configured Consul to use a valid recursor, add rules to `iptables` to redirect traffic from port `53` to port `8600`: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have configured Consul to use a valid recursor, add rules to `iptables` to redirect traffic from port `53` to port `8600`.
```
nit

```shell-session
# iptables -t nat -A PREROUTING -p udp -m udp --dport 53 -j REDIRECT --to-ports 8600 \
  iptables -t nat -A PREROUTING -p tcp -m tcp --dport 53 -j REDIRECT --to-ports 8600 \
  iptables -t nat -A OUTPUT -d localhost -p udp -m udp --dport 53 -j REDIRECT --to-ports 8600 \
  iptables -t nat -A OUTPUT -d localhost -p tcp -m tcp --dport 53 -j REDIRECT --to-ports 8600
```

## macOS

> On macOS systems, you can use the macOS system resolver to point all `.consul` requests to Consul.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On macOS systems, use the macOS system resolver to point all `.consul` requests to Consul.
```
removed "you can" for brevity

> Documentation for this feature is available via the `man 5 resolver` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to `man 5 resolver` command for feature details.
```

> To configure the macOS system resolver to forward DNS queries to Consul you must add a resolver entry in the `/etc/resolver/` directory that points at the Consul agent. To configure a resolver entry, you will need sudo/root access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure the macOS system resolver to forward DNS queries to Consul, add a resolver entry in the `/etc/resolver/` directory that points at the Consul agent. You need sudo/root access.
```

If you do not have this folder, create it.

```shell-session
# mkdir -p /etc/resolver
```
 

> Create a new file `/etc/resolver/consul`, and add the following text to the file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new file `/etc/resolver/consul` with `nameserver` and `port` entries.
```

<CodeBlockConfig filename="/etc/resolver/consul">

```plaintext
nameserver 127.0.0.1
port 8600
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

The configuration informs the macOS resolver daemon to forward all `.consul` TLD requests to `127.0.0.1` on port `8600`.

## Next steps

This guide helped you configure your node DNS to forward requests to Consul.

> To learn more on how to query Consul DNS once forwarding is enabled refer to [DNS forwarding workflow](/consul/docs/services/discovery/dns-forwarding#workflow).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more on how to query Consul DNS once forwarding is enabled, refer to [DNS forwarding workflow](/consul/docs/services/discovery/dns-forwarding#workflow).
```
nit

> For more information over other DNS features and configurations available in Consul refer to [DNS usage overview](/consul/docs/services/discovery/dns-overview).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on other DNS features and configurations available in Consul, refer to [DNS usage overview](/consul/docs/services/discovery/dns-overview).
```
nit
